----
Goal
----
Possible title for publication: "Platform for design and test of Interfering Satellite Viruses" 

The goal is to create a process through which antiviral virus particles can be designed and tested. The applications of this technology are many: wherever viruses cause problems, this technology can help. A notable advantage of this type of an antiviral "drug" is that it is an evolving drug. The antiviral viruses will evolve alongsize the target virus. In some sense, this process would be an "app" that is built on other applications that our team provides.

Prior work (*) has demonstrated that it is possible to create defective interfering virus particles against a few infectious mammalian viruses. The goal of this work would be to create a "recipe" for this process and an automatable protocol for rigorously testing the interfering virus efficiency. The design process will involve removal of key components of the wild-type virus genome, such as capsid genes. 

(*) Nigel J. Dimmock and Andrew J. Easton. Defective Interfering Influenza Virus RNAs: Time To Reevaluate Their Clinical Potential as Broad-Spectrum Antivirals? J. Virology, 2015

----------------------
Stages of the project
----------------------
The project will utilize some form of design-build-test cycle. The design stage will involve removing essential components from the target wild-type virus. Although this process appears to be a vector-editting process, many of these designs will fail to assemble into virus particles. Therefore, it is essential to visualize design side-by-side with test results. 

The build stage will involve co-transforming a host cell with the synthetic antivirus genome and a helper plasmid that will provide the proteins necessary for the virus particles to assemble. 

The test stage will involve several controls to assure that the infection efficiency of the synthetic virus particles are the same as the original virus and that the synthetic virus particles do not lyse the cells. The main part of the test stage will be a time-course experiment where both the synthetic interfering viruses and the wild-type viruses compete in the same mix. The experiment needs to have several replicates and variables such as MOI need to be fairly well controlled. 

--------------
Target Journal
--------------
Depends on quality of preliminary findings. We should aim as high as possible

---------------
Submission Date
---------------
~1 year from now

----------------
Figures/Diagrams
----------------
1) Conceptual overview 
2) Plots: Mathematical Model of (1) - interactive?
3) Plots: Overlay of (2) and refined data
4) Some kind of nice overview of protocols - interactive?

-----------------------
Notes from Easton et.al
-----------------------

DI viruses are virus particles that contain a heavily deleted version of the infectious genome (i.e., they are defective in one or more genes) and have the ability in vitro to interfere with, and diminish the production of, infectious progeny produced by the infectious virus from which that DI particle originated (7). DI genomes and DI particles are made by nearly all viruses and may represent an evolutionarily acceptable by-product of an inefficient replication process. Alternatively, they may be produced for evolutionary reasons, such as the stimulation of innate immunity, that could favor survival of the host species and hence perpetuation of the virus population itself. Because of its deleted genome, a DI virus is by definition noninfectious and is replicated only in a cell coinfected by an infectious “helper” virus, usually the virus from which the DI genome is derived. This provides the function(s) that the DI genome lacks and enables the DI genome to be packaged into virus particles. A high multiplicity of infection favors the propagation of DI viruses, as more cells can be infected simultaneously with DI and infectious viruses. It follows that all DI genomes retain the molecular signals that permit their replication and packaging into new DI particles and that the DI genome is packaged by proteins made by the helper virus. Hence, the progeny DI and helper viruses are antigenically identical.

It is believed that the ratio of DI genomes to infectious genomes within the cell determines the outcome of infection in the culture system as a whole. The level of DI RNA that is needed to establish protection from a particular dose of infectious virus has only been determined empirically. In one scenario, the DI genome enters some cells but others have no DI genome. Similarly, some cells will be infected and others not. Finally, some infected cells contain both a DI and an infectious genome. When the number of infectious particles is below the (unknown) threshold, the DI genome population inhibits the spread of infectious virus to a degree determined by many factors, including the ratio of DI genomes to virus genomes in the culture system as a whole and their respective rates of replication. At a low ratio of DI genomes to infectious genomes, there is replication of both genome types without interference and no reduction of specific infectivity or total particles produced. As the ratio of DI genomes to infectious genomes in the cell increases, more DI genomes than infectious genomes are produced, although the total number of virus particles produced is unaltered. However, here the majority of particles are DI virus. With an even greater increase in the ratio of DI genomes to infectious genomes, there is a reduction in replication of both DI and infectious genomes and a fall in the total number of particles (DI virus and infectious virus) produced. In essence, this is a race between the amplification of the DI RNA, which leads to the production of more DI virus and the establishment of more DI virus-protected cells, and the spread of infectious virus. When the DI RNA “wins,” clinical disease is inhibited and the animal is protected.

An important clinical consequence of 244 DI virus administration is that replication of infectious challenge virus was reduced but not completely inhibited.

Animals treated with 244 DI virus and challenged with heterologous viruses generated solid protective immunity to those challenge viruses, indicating that the DI RNA reduced but did not eliminate replication of the infectious virus, a scenario which parallels that seen with influenza A virus

If no infectious influenza A virus enters that cell, the DI RNA eventually decays.

Unlike a vaccine, which takes several weeks to stimulate full immunity, DI virus-mediated protection is effective immediately

Dear Dr Chandran,
We have relatively recently published a review that summarises the state of play with DI viruses which should provide you with many of the answers you are seeking.  My view in summary is that this is a viable way to go but that it requires care and a fair amount of fundamental analysis to identify the correct DI virus genome to achieve success.  I have attached a copy of the review.

With regard to enhancing replication of the DI over wild type this is not really possible as the DI virus uses exactly the same replication signals and processes as the parental virus which has evolved the best system over time.  There has been some work in bacteria but it is not something that I follow greatly.  

Regards

Andrew Easton

